---
layout: post
title: Why XMPP?
author: Chris Johnson
---
# [{{ page.title }}]({{ page.url }})
We're using XMPP (eXtensible Messaging and Presence Protocol) because it is a well-defined, open standard, real-time protocol. We could use HTTP for messaging, but it requires cumbersome workarounds for its request/response design to get real-time behavior. On top of real-time communication, XMPP offers presence, discovery, and [our implementation](http://www.getvines.com) brings strong security into the mix. The combination makes a powerful platform upon which to build great applications.

##Real-time communication
Information is best served fresh. Countless systems and protocols have been built to solve the problem of real-time, event driven information, but none have reached the pervasiveness and acceptance of XMPP. The protocol has matured with numerous implementations, and almost every organization uses XMPP in one form or another to accomplish real-time messaging. Having solved this problem in the form of a great protocol saves a huge amount of effort and time when it comes to developing new applications. 

##Presence
Poll driven monitoring and status awareness is a downer. It’s resource intensive, slow, often inaccurate, and hard to build and maintain. The status of people and systems should be based on what is happening to them right now. Status, or presence in XMPP, is a much more elegant solution because events are broadcast to interested parties as they happen. Presence should be event driven and XMPP enables it as a core protocol feature. On top of that, the acronym looks much better with presence included.

##Discovery
In our experience, lack of good discovery can block the implementation of great solutions at scale. A really nice feature of XMPP is the ability for people or systems to advertise their capabilities. Through extensions, XMPP offers a nice solution to this problem. We are exploring ways to leverage the capability of the protocol coupled with NoSQL databases to gain really interesting insight about our networks.

##Security
XMPP has flexible SASL authentication baked right in. It also mandates the use of TLS encryption on connections to the server. In fact, our Vines server doesn't support a plain-text, unencrypted mode; all client connections are encrypted. An XMPP domain is a closed system in the sense that messages can only be sent between two authenticated users in the same domain. This prevents spam and unwanted messages passing through the server. Although XMPP servers can be federated to allow multiple domains to talk to each other, it's up to you to decide which domains to allow to connect. 

XMPP is more than just instant-messaging.  It’s a mature protocol that can be used to connect components in any scalable web application.  Take a look at our open-source [Vines XMPP server](http://www.getvines.com).  We’d love to hear what you think.

\- {{ page.author }}
<br/>{{ page.date | date_to_string }}
